---
dg-home: false
dg-publish: true
---
# Derivatives and local behavior

When using functions to model physical situations, it is often very helpful to be able to determine whether there are points at which the function takes a maximum or minimum value. It turns out that, for differentiable functions, derivatives are quite helpful in looking for these points.  

>[!defn] Definition: increasing and decreasing functions
>A scalar function $(D,\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$ is said to be **increasing** in the interval $I\subseteq D$ if $x\leq y$ implies $f(x)\leq f(y)$ for all $x,y\in I$.
>Similarly, it is said to be **decreasing** in the interval $I$ if $x\leq y$ implies $f(x)\geq f(y)$ for all $x,y\in I$.

>[!defn] Definition: interior and boundary points
>Given the function $(D,\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$, a point $x_{0}\in D=\mathrm{Dom}(f)$ is said to be an **interior point** if there exists $\delta>0$ such that the open interval $I_{x_{0},\delta}:=(x_{0}-\delta,x_{0}+\delta)$ lies inside $\mathrm{Dom}(f)$.
>A point which is not an **interior point** is called a **boundary point**. A boundary point is either a [[1.2 Limits of scalar functions#^772289|left or right accumulation point]] which belongs to the domain.
^efd1a3

>[!important] Proposition: derivatives and local behavior
>Let $(D,\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$ be differentiable at the [[1.6 Derivatives and extrema of scalar functions#^efd1a3|interior point]] $x_{0}$. It follows that:
>1) if $f'(x_{0})>0$, the function is increasing in $I_{x_{0},\delta}$ for some $\delta>0$;
>2) if $f'(x_{0})<0$ , the function is decreasing in $I_{x_{0},\delta}$ for some $\delta>0$.
>
>Moreover, if $(D,\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$ is differentiable in the open interval $I$, then:
>1) if $f'(x)>0$ for all $x\in I$, the function is increasing in $I$;
>2) if $f'(x)<0$ for all $x\in I$, the function is decreasing in $I$;
>3) if $f'(x)=0$ for all $x\in I$, the function is constant in $I$ and the converse holds.
>
>For a closed interval $I=[a,b]\subseteq D$ ($a,b\neq \pm\infty$), the previous conclusions hold provided $(D,\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$ is differentiable in the interior $(a,b)$ of $I$ and continuous in the whole $I=[a,b]$.
^adc8fa

# Local extrema and where/how to find them

We are now ready to define what local extrema are.

>[!defn] Definition: local extrema
>Given the function $(D,\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$ and the [[1.6 Derivatives and extrema of scalar functions#^efd1a3|interior point]] $x_{0}\in D=\mathrm{Dom}(f)$, then:
>1) if there is $\epsilon>0$ such that  $f(x_{0})>f(x)$ for all $x$ in $(x_{0}-\epsilon,x_{0}+\epsilon)$, the function has a **local maximum** at $x_{0}$;
>2) if there is $\epsilon>0$ such that  $f(x_{0})<f(x)$ for all $x$ in $(x_{0}-\epsilon,x_{0}+\epsilon)$, the function has a **local minimum** at $x_{0}$.
>
>In general, $(D,\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$ is said to have a **local extremum** at $x_{0}$ if $x_{0}$ is either a local maximum or a local minimum of $f$.

Given how [[1.6 Derivatives and extrema of scalar functions#^adc8fa|derivatives dictate local behavior]], it is clear that a local extremum can not be a point $x_{0}$ at which either $f'(x_{0})>0$ or $f'(x_{0})<0$. We are thus left with only types of points that can are candidates to be local extrema. These points deserve a name of their own.

>[!defn] Definition: critical point
>Given the function $(D,\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$, an [[1.6 Derivatives and extrema of scalar functions#^efd1a3|interior point]] $x_{0} \in D=\mathrm{Dom}(f)$ is called a **critical point** if either $f'(x_{0})=0$ or $f'(x_{0})$ does not exist.
^d2fcd0

>[!important] Proposition: local extrema and critical points
>If $(D,\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$ has a local extremum at the [[1.6 Derivatives and extrema of scalar functions#^efd1a3|interior point]] $x_{0}\in  D=\mathrm{Dom}(f)$, then $x_{0}$ is a [[1.6 Derivatives and extrema of scalar functions#^d2fcd0|critical point]] of $(D,\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$.

>[!important] Rolle's theorem
>Let $a,b\in\mathbb{R}$ and $([a,b],\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$ be continuous and differentiable in $(a,b)$. If $f(a)=f(b)$ then there is $y\in(a,b)$ such that $f'(y)=0$.

>[!important] Mean value theorem
>Let $a,b\in\mathbb{R}$ and $([a,b],\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$ be continuous and differentiable in $(a,b)$. Then, there is $y\in(a,b)$ such that $f'(y)=\frac{f(b)-f(a)}{b-a}$.

We can collect all the results summarized above to obtain a criteria for discovering local extrema of differentiable scalar functions. 

>[!important] Proposition: first derivative test for local extrema
>Given the function $(D,\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$ and a [[1.6 Derivatives and extrema of scalar functions#^d2fcd0|critical point]] $x_{0}\in D$, we have that:
>1) if there exists $\delta>0$ such that $f'(x)>0$ for $x\in (x_{0}-\delta,x_{0})$ and $f'(x)<0$ for $x\in (x_{0},x_{0} + \delta)$ then $x_{0}$ is a **local maximum** for $(D,\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$;
>2)  if there exists $\delta>0$ such that $f'(x)<0$ for $x\in (x_{0}-\delta,x_{0})$ and $f'(x)>0$ for $x\in (x_{0},x_{0} + \delta)$ then $x_{0}$ is a **local minimum** for $(D,\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$.

>[!attention] Remark: critical points need not be local extrema
>Note that critical points need not be extrema. Indeed, consider the function $(\mathbb{R},\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$ given by $f(x)=x^{3}$ and the interior point $x_{0}=0$. A direct computation shows that $x_{0}$ is a critical point because $f'(0)=0$. However, $f'(x)>$ whenever $x\neq 0$, and the function is increasing in the whole $D$.

^f4bbab

If we are blessed by the existence of the second derivative of our function, we may rely also on the following proposition.

>[!important] Proposition: second derivative test for local extrema
>Given the function $(D,\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$ and a [[1.6 Derivatives and extrema of scalar functions#^d2fcd0|critical point]] $x_{0}\in D$, assuming the second derivative $f''(x_{0})$ exists, we have that:
>1) if $f''(x_{0})<0$ then $x_{0}$ is a **local maximum** for $f$;
>2) if $f''(x_{0})>0$ then $x_{0}$ is a **local minimum** for $f$;
>3) if $f''(x_{0})=0$ then you should seek for help somewhere else in the beautiful and wild realm of Mathematics.

^c80ae8

It is true that the second derivative test may be computationally faster in most cases, so we may be inclined to dismiss the first derivative test, and forget it exists. However, doing it would be a mistake. The second derivative test requires second derivative to exist, and this is not always the case.

>[!attention] Remark: the first derivative test is more general than the second derivative test
>As anticipated, there are situations in which the first derivative test can be applied while the second derivative test **can not** be applied. The prototypical such example is $f(x)=|x|$ and $x_{0}=0$.

In conclusion, never rely on the fastest/simple method without previously thinking and understanding the conceptual situation at hand.


# Global extrema and where/how to find them

Local extrema are, quite obviously, local. This means that, even if $x_{0}$ is a local maximum, there may be a point $x_{1}$ such that $f(x_{1})>f(x_{0})$ as long as $x_{1}$ is sufficiently far from $x_{0}$. Moreover, it may also happen that, again when we are sufficiently far from $x_{0}$, the function grows or degrows indefinitely. For instance, a direct application of the [[1.6 Derivatives and extrema of scalar functions#^c80ae8|second derivative test]] shows that the [[1.3 Derivatives of scalar functions#^a6b2f2|smooth function]] $(\mathbb{R},\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$ given by $f(x)=x^{3} +x^{2}$ has a **local maximum** at $x=-\frac{2}{3}$. However, it is also true that
$$ \lim_{x\rightarrow +\infty}f(x)=+\infty ,$$
from which it follows that the function grows indefinitely as $x$ grows.

We thus define global extrema as follows.

>[!defn] Definition: global extrema
>Given the function $(D,\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R})$ and the point $x_{0}\in D$, we have that:
>1)  $x_{0}$ is a **global maximum** if $f(x_{0})>f(x)$ for all $x\in D$;
>2) $x_{0}$ is a **global minimum** if $f(x_{0})<f(x)$ for all $x\in D$;
>
>In general, the point $x_{0}$ is called a **global extremum**  if it is either a global maximum or a global minimum.

For continuous functions whose domain $D$ is closed and bounded, global extrema exist because of the [[1.2 Limits of scalar functions#^f806e3|extreme value theorem]] we recall here:

>[!important] Theorem ([Extreme value theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extreme_value_theorem))
>If $f$ is continuous in $[a,b]$ then it attains a maximum and minimum value in $[a,b]$.

When the function is not continuous or the domain is not closed, or not bounded, global extrema may or may not exist. To check if global extrema exist, we need to obviously look for local extrema (if they exist), and then compute the limit at each [[1.2 Limits of scalar functions#^772289|strict left/right accumulation point]] and/or at $\pm\infty$ (if possible). 

Then, we are faced with a multitude of situations depending on the results of the previous computations. It would be quite uninspiring to make a list of the possible cases. It is better to refer to exercises to train how to investigate the possible cases (you are also invited to consult [this page](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/classes/calci/absextrema.aspx) and [this other page](https://calculus.subwiki.org/wiki/Procedure_for_finding_local_and_endpoint_extrema_using_the_first_derivative_test) for additional insights).
