---
dg-home: false
dg-publish: true
---

# From 1 to many dimensions

Let's start recalling that the set $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ of $n$-tuple of real numbers is also a [vector space](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_space).  Roughly speaking, this means that we can "sum" points (or better, vectors) with each other according to 
$$
\mathbf{v} + \mathbf{w}=(v_{1},\cdots,v_{n}) + (w_{1},\cdots,w_{n})= (v_{1}+w_{1},\cdots,v_{n}+w_{n}).
$$
We can also multiply every vector $\mathbf{v}\in\mathbb{R}^{n}$ with a real number $\alpha\in\mathbb{R}$ obtaining $\alpha\,\mathbf{v}=(\alpha,v_{1},\cdots,\alpha \, v_{n})$. Moreover, there is a vector in $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ that is peculiar: the zero vector $\mathbf{0}=(0,\cdots, 0)$. Indeed, a direct check shows that $\mathbf{v}+\mathbf{0}=\mathbf{0}+\mathbf{v}=\mathbf{v}$ for every $\mathbf{v}\in\mathbb{R}^{n}$.

When $n=3$, we can think of $\mathbb{R}^{n=3}$ as a (local) model of the physical space we live in. Establishing a correspondence between the components of the vectors and physical reference axis, and declaring the origin of this physical reference system (_i.e._ declaring where the zero vector $\mathbf{0}=(0,0,0)$ is located) we can think of a vector $(x,y,z)=\mathbf{v}\in\mathbb{R}^{3}$ as a line joining the point in space with coordinates $(x,y,z)$ with the origin $(0,0,0)$ of the reference physical system (more on this below).

It follows from Pitagora's theorem that the length of that line is just $\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2} + z^{2}}$, and we can also look at this lenght as the distance between $(x,y,z)$ and $(0,0,0)$. We can generalize this picture to obtain the distance between $\mathbf{v}=(x,y,z)$ and $\mathbf{v}_{0}=(x_{0},y_{0},z_{0})$ according to 

$$
d(\mathbf{v},\mathbf{v}_{0})=\sqrt{(x-x_{0})^{2} + (y-y_{0})^{2} + (z-z_{0})^{2}}.
$$

When $n=1$ we [[1.2 Limits of scalar functions|already found]] a similar expression for the distance between two points on the line, and we used it in the definition of limits. Something analogous happens for multivariable functions. 

For arbitrary $n$, the distance between two points is defined as

$$
d(\mathbf{v},\mathbf{v}_{0})=\sqrt{\sum_{j=1}^{n}\,(x^{j} - x_{0}^{j})^{2}},
$$

where $\mathbf{v}=(x^{1},\cdots x^{n})$ and $\mathbf{v}_{0}=(x^{1}_{0},\cdots x^{n}_{0})$. The distance between $\mathbf{v}$ and $\mathbf{0}$ is also called the **modulus** (or **norm**) of $\mathbf{v}$ and it is also denoted as $||\mathbf{v}||$. It follows that 

$$
||\mathbf{v}-\mathbf{w}||=d(\mathbf{v},\mathbf{w})
$$

The couple $(\mathbb{R}^{n},||\cdot ||)$ will be referred to as the $n$-dimensional **Euclidean space**. An important property of the norm $\Vert\cdot\Vert$ is the so-called [triangle inequality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triangle_inequality)
$$
||\mathbf{v} + \mathbf{w}||\leq ||\mathbf{v}|| + ||\mathbf{w}||,
$$
holding for all $\mathbf{v},\mathbf{w}\in\mathbb{R}^{n}$.

The multidimensional analogue of an [[1.2 Limits of scalar functions#^19990d|open/closed interval]] is the open/closed ball.

>[!defn] Definition: open/closed ball
>We define the open ball centered at $\mathbf{v}_{0}\in\mathbb{R}^{n}$ with radius $r>0$ to be the set
>$$
>B_{\mathbf{v}_{0},r}:=\left\{\mathbf{v}\in \mathbb{R}^{n}\,|\quad ||\mathbf{v}-\mathbf{v}_{0}||=d(\mathbf{v},\mathbf{v}_{0}) < r \right\}.
>$$
>If instead of $<$ we use $\leq$, we obtain the closed ball denoted by $\overline{B_{\mathbf{v}_{0},r}}$.

>[!defn] Definition: interior and boundary points of a set
>Let $A$ be a subset of $\mathbb{R}^{n}$. A point $\mathbf{x}_{0}\in A$ is called an **interior point** of $A$ if there is $r>0$ such that the open ball $B_{\mathbf{x}_{0},r}$ is all contained in $A$. A point $\mathbf{x}_{0}\in \mathbb{R}^{n}$ is called a **boundary point** of $A$ if the open ball $B_{\mathbf{x}_{0},r}$ contains at least one point which is not ín $A$ for every $r>0$.

^ceea9b

>[!rem] Remark
>Note that a boundary point of $A$ does not necessarily belong to $A$ itself. For instance,  every point $\mathbf{x}_{0}$ such that $||\mathbf{x} - \mathbf{x}_{0}||=3$ is a boundary point of $A=B_{\mathbf{x},3}$ which does not belong to $A$. 

>[!note] Definition (Closed and open sets)
>A **closed set** $C\subseteq\mathbb{R}^{n}$ is a set that contains all its boundary points, while an **open set** $O\subseteq \mathbb{R}^{n}$ is a set which is the complement of a closed set.
>The intersection of closed sets is still a closed set, while the union of open sets is still an open set.

It turns out that the Euclidean distance can be written in terms the so-called [scalar (dot) product](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dot_product):
$$
\mathbf{v}\cdot\mathbf{w}:=\sum_{j=1}^{n}v^{j}w^{j}.
$$
The scalar product allows to introduce a notion of **orthogonality** among vectors by declaring two vector orthogonal, say $\mathbf{v}\perp\mathbf{w}$, whenever their dot product is vanishes. 

There is an intimate connection between the scalar product and the Euclidean distance introduced above given by the formula
$$
d(\mathbf{v},\mathbf{w})=||\mathbf{v} - \mathbf{w}||=\sqrt{(\mathbf{v} - \mathbf{w})\cdot (\mathbf{v} - \mathbf{w})} ,
$$
which can be directly checked.

Having familiarized with the basics of scalar functions, we are now interested in understanding the behavior of functions whose input space is $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ with $n\geq 1$, and whose output space is $\mathbb{R}^{m}$ with $m\geq 1$. 

When $m=1$, we obtain the so-called **multivariable scalar** functions, or simply **multivariable** functions (note that scalar functions are a subfamily of multivariable functions). A typical example of multivariable function is the temperature function $T\colon \mathbb{R}^{3}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ that assigns to every point in our local model of the physical space a number representing the temperature at that point.

When $n=1$ but $m\geq 1$, we obtain the so-called **vector functions**. The typical example is the position function $(D,\mathbb{R},\mathbf{r},\mathbb{R}^{3})$ that assigns the position of a particle in our local model of physical space $\mathbb{R}^{3}$ to a point in our local model of time $\mathbb{R}$. 

When both $n,m\geq 1$, we obtain the so-called **multivariable vector functions** (note that all previously mentioned classes of functions are particular cases of multivariable vector functions). The typical example is the electric field $(D,\mathbb{R}^{3},\mathbf{E},\mathbb{R}^{3})$ that assigns to each point in our local model of physical space $\mathbb{R}^{3}$ the electric field vector $\mathbf{E}=(E_{x},E_{y},E_{z})$ at that point.

# Polar coordinates

The main idea behind the change of variables/coordinates is that of changing how we represent "something". 

For concreteness, let us consider how can we change the representation of points in the plane $\mathbb{R}^{2}$. It is well-known that we can represent/describe a point $\mathbf{p}$ in the plane using two numbers $(p_{x},p_{y})\equiv(x,y)$ by introducing two mutually orthogonal lines and considering the orthogonal projections of the point on said lines. By doing this, we introduced the so-called [Cartesian coordinates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cartesian_coordinate_system) on the plane. With a little bit of immagination, this procedure can be naturally extended from the plane $\mathbb{R}^{2}$ to an arbitrary $\mathbb{R}^{n}$.

>[!rem] Remark
>The way we "built" Cartesian coordinates exploits the notion of orthogonality which is connected with the notion of dot product discussed above. However, orthogonality is not needed, and we could develop a Cartesian coordinate system which is not orthogonal.

The representation through Cartesian coordinates is very intuitive but it is not the only one possible. Indeed, if we can take a look at the graphical representation of a point $\mathbf{p}$ in a plane with Cartesian coordinates $(p_{x},p_{y})\equiv(x,y)$ , we may realize that we can also represent $\mathbf{p}$ by means of two different numbers: the distance $r=d(\mathbf{p},\mathbf{0})$ with respect to the origin, and the angle $\theta$ that the vector determined by $\mathbf{p}$  makes with the horizontal line. The explicit expressions of $r$ and $\theta$ in terms of Cartesian coordinates are
$$
r(x,y)=\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}}
$$
and
$$
\theta(x,y) = \mathrm{atan}2(x,y)= \left\{\begin{matrix}\arctan\left(\frac{y}{x}\right) & \quad x>0 \\
\arctan\left(\frac{y}{x}\right) + \pi & \quad x<0,\quad x\geq 0 \\
\arctan\left(\frac{y}{x}\right) - \pi & \quad x<0,\quad x< 0 \\
\frac{\pi}{2} & x=0,\quad y> 0 \\ 
-\frac{\pi}{2} & x=0,\quad y<0 ,\end{matrix} \right.
$$
and the function $\mathrm{atan}2$ is thoroughly discussed [here on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atan2). 

By introducing $r$ and $\theta$, we introduced the so-called [polar coordinates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polar_coordinate_system) in the plane. There are two important things we must comment:

1) the origin $\mathbf{0} =(0,0)$ can not be represented using polar coordinates, and we conclude that we must specify a **domain** of application when changing coordinates (in particular, Cartesian coordinates can be used for every point in the plane, while polar coordinates can not be used to represent the origin);
2) the representation in polar coordinates is expressed through the representation in Cartesian coordinates, and we conclude that changes of coordinates are always intended with respect to some other coordinates system.

Therefore, we can look at the change of coordinates from the Cartesian to the polar system as a function $\psi\colon \mathbb{R}^{2}-\{(0,0)\}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{2}$ given by
$$
\psi(x,y)=(r(x,y),\theta(x,y))
$$
where the expressions for $r$ and $\theta$ are given above. Note that the range of $\psi$ is not the whole $\mathbb{R}^{2}$. We can define an inverse of $\psi$ if we consider the subset $A=(0,+\infty)\times[0,2\pi)\subset \mathbb{R}^{2}$ and set $\psi^{-1}\colon A\rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{2}$ by
$$
\psi^{-1}(r,\theta)=(x(r,\theta)=r\cos(\theta), y(r,\theta)=r\sin(\theta)) .
$$
Of course, the origin $(0,0)$ is not in the range of $\psi^{-1}$ because it is not in the domain space of $\psi$.

# Cylindrical coordinates

^1f484e

The idea behind polar coordinates can be extended from $\mathbb{R}^{2}$ to $\mathbb{R}^{3}$ in at least two ways. Specifically, we can decide to use a polar coordinate system for the $xy$-plane ($z=0$) and a Cartesian coordinate system for the $z$-axis obtaining the so-called [cylindrical coordinates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cylindrical_coordinate_system) determined by the function $\psi\colon \mathbb{R}^{3}-\{(0,0,0)\} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{3}$ given by

$$
\psi(x,y,z)=\left\{\begin{matrix} \rho(x,y,z)=\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2} } \\ \\ \theta(x,y,z)= \mathrm{atan}2(x,y) \\ \\ z(x,y,z)=z ,\end{matrix} \right.
$$

^432b85

and with inverse $\psi^{-1}\colon A\times \mathbb{R}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{3}$ given by

$$
\psi^{-1}(\rho,\theta,z)=\left\{ \begin{matrix} x(\rho,\theta,z)=\rho\cos(\theta) \\ \\ y(\rho,\theta,z)=\rho\sin(\theta) \\ \\ z(\rho,\theta,z)=z , \end{matrix}\right.
$$

^cbf7ee



with $A=(0,+\infty)\times[0,2\pi)\subset \mathbb{R}^{2}$.

# Spherical coordinates

^b5d3f4

The second way to generalize polar coordinates is given by the so-called [spherical coordinates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spherical_coordinate_system) (**note** that the role of $\theta$ and $\varphi$ are exchanged with respect to the Wikipedia article) determined by the function $\psi\colon \mathbb{R}^{3}-\{(0,0,0)\} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{3}$ given by

$$
\psi(x,y,z)=\left\{\begin{matrix} \rho(x,y,z)=\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2} + z^{2}} \\ \\
\theta(x,y,z)= \mathrm{atan}2(x,y) \\ \\
\varphi(x,y,z)=\arccos\left(\frac{z}{\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2} + z^{2}}}\right)\end{matrix}\right.,
$$

and with inverse $\psi^{-1}\colon B\rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{3}$ given by

$$
\psi^{-1}(\rho,\theta,\varphi)=\left\{\begin{matrix} x(\rho,\theta,\varphi)=\rho\cos(\theta)\sin(\varphi) \\ \\
y(\rho,\theta,\varphi)=\rho\sin(\theta)\sin(\varphi) \\ \\ 
z(\rho,\theta,\varphi)=\rho \cos(\varphi) , \end{matrix} \right.
$$

^1ce5e7

with $B=(0,+\infty)\times[0,2\pi)\times[0,\pi]\subset \mathbb{R}^{2}$.

Once we are here, we can let our creativity run wild and invent as many change of coordinates we want. However, not all of them can be directly interpreted geometrically like Cartesian, polar, cylindrical, and spherical. We will discuss some more examples when investigating integrals.

# Change of coordinates and functions

Suppose we know the expression of the function $(A,\mathbb{R},f,\mathbb{R}$ in some coordinate system (_e.g._, Cartesian coordinates). What happens to $f$ if we change coordinates? 

Consider the function $(\mathbb{R}^{2},\mathbb{R}^{2},f,\mathbb{R})$ that in Cartesian coordinates reads
$$
f(x,y)=y .
$$
If we consider polar coordinates $(r,\theta)$, then we know that we can express $x$ and $y$ as functions of $r$ and $\theta$ (as long as we exclude the origin $(0,0)$) by means of the function $(A,\mathbb{R}^{2},\psi^{-1},\mathbb{R}^{2}$ given by
$$
\psi^{-1}(r,\theta)=(x(r,\theta)=r\cos(\theta), y(r,\theta)=r\sin(\theta)), 
$$
with $A=(0,+\infty)\times[0,2\pi)\subset \mathbb{R}^{2}$. Therefore, we can express $y$  as $r\sin(\theta)$, obtaining the expression of $f$ in polar coordinates, which is written 
$$
f\circ\psi^{-1}(r,\theta)=r\sin(\theta) .
$$
The generalization to other coordinates system follows the same idea.

We thus conclude that changing the coordinate representation of a function is nothing but composing the original function with the multivariable vector function implementing the change of coordinates.
