---
dg-home: false
dg-publish: true
---
## Change of coordinates

1) Recalling how the [[2.1 From 1 to many dimensions#^1f484e|cylindrical]] and [[2.1 From 1 to many dimensions#^b5d3f4|spherical]] coordinates are expressed in terms of the Cartesian coordinates, find the function determining the passage from cylindrical to spherical coordinates and its inverse.  
	 >[!note]- Solution:
	> Compose $\psi_{cyl}$ of [[2.1 From 1 to many dimensions#^1f484e|cylindrical coordinates]] with $\psi^{-1}_{sph}$ of [[2.1 From 1 to many dimensions#^b5d3f4|spherical coordinates]] to get how cylindrical coordinates are expressed in terms of spherical coordinates. Exchange the role of $\psi$ and $\psi^{-1}$ to obtain how spherical coordinates are expressed using cylindrical coordinates.

2) Determine the expression in cylindrical and spherical coordinates of the function $(D,\mathbb{R}^{3},f,\mathbb{R})$ expressed in Cartesian coordinates by:
	$$	\begin{split} 	1) &\qquad  f(x,y,z)= x^{2} + y^{2} +z^{2}  \\ & \\ 	2) &\qquad  f(x,y,z)=\left(x,\;y-z,\; 3 \right) \\ & \\ 	3) & \qquad f(x,y,z)= \mathrm{e}^{x^{2} + y^{2} +z} . \end{split} $$
	>[!note]- Solution:
	>Compose $f$ with $\psi^{-1}$ of [[2.1 From 1 to many dimensions#^1f484e|cylindrical coordinates]] or [[2.1 From 1 to many dimensions#^b5d3f4|spherical coordinates]].

3) If the expression of $f\colon\mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ in polar coordinates is
	$$	f(r,\theta) = r + \theta ,	$$
	determine the value of $f$ a the point $\mathbf{p}$ with Cartesian coordinates $(p_{x}=0, p_{y}=1)$, $(p_{x}=1,p_{y}=1)$, and $(p_{x}=2,p_{y}=3)$.
	>[!note]- Solution
	>In Cartesian coordinates, the point $(0,1)$ corresponds to the point $(1,\pi/2)$ in polar coordinates, while the point $(2,3)$ corresponds to the point $(\sqrt{13},\arctan(3/2))$.


4) Let $(\mathbb{R},\mathbb{R},f, \mathbb{R})$ be expressed as
	$$ f(x)=\frac{\mathrm{e}^{2x} - 2 + \mathrm{e}^{-2x}}{4} 
	$$
	in Cartesian coordinates. Determine a change of coordinate $(A,\mathbb{R},\psi,\mathbb{R})$ leading to
	$$ f\circ\psi(v) = v^{2} $$
	and discuss its domain of applicability.
	>[!note]- Solution
	>Note that $\mathrm{e}^{2x} - 2 + \mathrm{e}^{-2x}=(\mathrm{e}^{x}-\mathrm{e}^{-x})^{2}$. The change of coordinates can be understood as $x(v)=\psi(v)$, and we must have
	>$$ \frac{(\mathrm{e}^{x}-\mathrm{e}^{-x})^{2}}{4}=f\circ\psi(v)=v^{2},$$
	>which means we can take $\psi(v)=\frac{\mathrm{e}^{x}-\mathrm{e}^{-x}}{2}$. This change of coordinates is valid for all $v$ and $x$ because both the domain and range of $\psi$ are $\mathbb{R}$. Note that $\tilde{\psi}(v)=-\psi(v)$ is another, perfectly valid choice.

5) Let $f\colon\mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ be expressed as
	$$ f(x,y)= ax + by $$
	in Cartesian coordinates with $a,b\neq 0$. Determine a change of coordinate $\psi\colon A\subseteq \mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{2}$ leading to 
	$$ f\circ\psi(v,w)= v^2 - w^{3},$$
	and discuss its domain of applicability. Is $\psi$ unique?
	>[!note]- Solution
	>There are infinitely many change of coordinates satisfying the constraint imposed. Indeed, we can take $\psi(v,w)=(x(v,w),y(v,w))$ with $x(v,w)=\alpha v^{2} +\beta w^{3}$, $y(v,w)=\gamma v^{2} +\delta w^{3}$ and $\alpha,\beta,\gamma,\delta$ satisfying $a(\alpha + \gamma )=1$ and $b(\beta + \delta)=-1$. In order for $\psi$ to be a valid change of coordinates, we must impose that $\alpha,\beta,\gamma,\delta$ are such that $\psi$ can be inverted somewhere, and this determines the domain of applicability. For instance, taking $\alpha=1/a$, $\delta=-1/b$, and $\beta=\gamma=0$, we have that $\psi^{-1}$ only exists when $x\geq 0$. On the other hand, if we take $\alpha=\beta=0$, $\gamma=1/a$, and $\delta=-1/b$, then $\psi^{-1}$ does not exist because  $(v,w)=\psi^{-1}\circ\psi(v,w)=\psi^{-1}(0,v^{2}+w^{3})$ is impossible.

# Limits of multivariable functions

1) Prove the following limits:
	 $$ 	 \begin{split} 	 1) &\qquad  \lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow (0,0)}\,\frac{x^{2}}{\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}}=0 \\ & \\ 	 2) &\qquad  \lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow (0,0)}\,\frac{2x^{2}\,y}{x^{2} + y^{2}}=0 \\ & \\ 	 3) & \qquad \lim_{x\rightarrow 1} \;(x^{2},\;\mathrm{e}^{x^{3} -1}) = (1,\;1) \\ & \\ 	 4) & \qquad \lim_{(x,y,z)\rightarrow (0,0,0)}\,\frac{xyz}{x^{2} + y^{2} + z^{2}} =0 \\ & \\ 	 5) & \qquad \lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow (0,0)}\,\frac{xy}{x^{2} +y^{2} +2}=0. \end{split} 	 $$
	>[!note]- Solution
	>1) We have to prove that, for every $\epsilon>0$, there is $\delta_{\epsilon}>0$ such that $\Vert\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{0}\Vert=\sqrt{(x-0)^{2}+(y-0)^{2}}=\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}}<\delta$ implies 
	>		$$ \vert\frac{x^{2}}{\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}}}\vert<\epsilon .$$
	>		At this purpose, we note that 
	>		$$ x^{2}\leq x^{2} + y^{2}\Longrightarrow \vert\frac{x^{2}}{\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}}}\vert\leq \vert\frac{x^{2}+y^{2}}{\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}}} \vert=\vert \sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}} \vert $$
	>		so that $\delta_{\epsilon}<\epsilon$ does the job.
	>2) We have to prove that, for every $\epsilon>0$, there is $\delta_{\epsilon}>0$ such that $\Vert\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{0}\Vert=\sqrt{(x-0)^{2}+(y-0)^{2}}=\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}}<\delta$ implies 
	>		$$ \vert\frac{2x^{2}y}{ x^{2}+y^{2} }\vert<\epsilon .$$
	>		At this purpose, we note that $x^{2}\leq x^{2} + y^{2}$ and $|y|=\sqrt{y^{2}}\leq \sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}}$, so that
	>		$$  \vert\frac{2x^{2}y}{ x^{2}+y^{2} }\vert\leq \frac{2(x^{2}+y^{2})\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}}{ x^{2}+y^{2} }=2 \sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}, $$
	>		and thus $\delta_{\epsilon}<\epsilon$ does the job.
	>3) In this case, we have a vector function whose components are continuous functions for all $x\in\mathbb{R}$. Therefore, the limit can be found by simply putting $x=1$.
	>4) We have to prove that, for every $\epsilon>0$, there is $\delta_{\epsilon}>0$ such that $\Vert\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{0}\Vert=\sqrt{(x-0)^{2}+(y-0)^{2} + (z-0)^{2}}=\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}+z^{2}}<\delta$ implies
	>		$$ \vert \frac{xyz}{x^{2} + y^{2} + z^{2}} \vert < \epsilon.$$
	>		At this purpose, we just note that $|x|=\sqrt{x^{2}}\leq\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}+z^{2}}$ (and similarly for $|y|$ and $|z|$), so that
	>		$$\vert \frac{xyz}{x^{2} + y^{2} + z^{2}} \vert\leq \sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}+z^{2}}, $$
	>		and thus $\delta_{\epsilon}<\epsilon$ does the job.
	>5) In this case, we have the quotient of polynomials (continuous functions) whose denominator does not vanish when $(x,y)=(0,0)$, so that the limit can be computed putting $(x,y)=(0,0)$.
	

2) Prove that the following limits do not exist:
	$$ \begin{split} 1) &\qquad \lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow(0,0)} \frac{x^{2}+\sin^{2}(y)}{2x^{2}+y^{2}} \\ & \\ 2)  & \qquad \lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow(0,0)} \frac{x^{2}y\mathrm{e}^{y}}{x^{4}+4y^{2}}  \\ & \\ 3) & \qquad \lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow(0,0)} \frac{x\cos(xy)}{3x^{3}+y} \\ & \\ 4) & \lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow(0,0)} \frac{\sin(2x) - 2x +y}{x^{3}+y} \qquad \\ & \\ 5) & \lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow(0,0)} \frac{\cos(x) - 1 + \frac{x^{2}}{2}}{x^{4}+y} . \qquad   .\end{split} $$
	>[!note]- Solution
	>1) Evaluate what happens when  $y=mx$ and $x\rightarrow 0$.
	>2) Evaluate what happens when  $y=mx^{2}$ and $x\rightarrow 0$.
	>3) Evaluate what happens when  $y=mx$ and $x\rightarrow 0$.
	>4) Evaluate what happens when  $y=-x^{3}+2x$ and $x\rightarrow 0$, and then what happens when $x=0$ and $y\rightarrow 0$.
	>5) Evaluate what happens when  $y=-x^{4}+y^{2}$ and $x\rightarrow 0$, and then what happens when $x=0$ and $y\rightarrow 0$.
	

3) Determine the points at which $(\mathbb{R}^{2},\mathbb{R}^{2},f,\mathbb{R})$ is continuous when
	$$ \begin{split} 1)\quad  & f(x,y) = \left\{\begin{matrix}\frac{x^{2}y^{3}}{2x^{2}+y^{2}} & (x,y)\neq(0,0) \\ 1 & (x,y)=(0,0)\end{matrix}\right.  \\ & \\ 2)\quad & f(x,y)  = \left\{\begin{matrix}\frac{xy}{x^{2}+xy + y^{2}} & (x,y)\neq(0,0) \\ 0 & (x,y)=(0,0) .\end{matrix}\right. \\ & \\ 3) \quad & f(x,y)= \left\{\begin{matrix}\frac{xy}{\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}} & (x,y)\neq(0,0) \\ 0 & (x,y)=(0,0) .\end{matrix}\right. \\ & \\ 4) \quad & f(x,y)= \left\{\begin{matrix}\frac{x^{4} + x^{2}y - y^{3}}{\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}} & (x,y)\neq(0,0) \\ 0 & (x,y)=(0,0) .\end{matrix}\right. \\ & \\ 5) \quad & f(x,y)= \left\{\begin{matrix}\frac{\sin(x-y)}{\mathrm{e}^{x} - \mathrm{e}^{y}} & (x,y)\neq(c,c) \\ 1 & (x,y)=(c,c) .\end{matrix}\right. \end{split}$$
	>[!note]- Solution
	>1) Outside $(0,0)$, the function is continuous because it is the quotient of polynomials whose denominator never vanishes. Evaluating what happens when $y=mx$, and $x\rightarrow 0$, we obtain $0$. Therefore, even if the limit for $(x,y)\rightarrow(0,0)$ existed, it would be equal to $0\neq f(0,0)=1$, so that the function is not continuous at $(0,0)$.
	>2) Outside $(0,0)$, the function is continuous for essentially the same reasons of point 1). Evaluating what happens when $y=mx$, and $x\rightarrow 0$, we obtain $\frac{m}{1+m+m^{2}}$, which means the function is not continuous at $(0,0)$.
	>3) Outside $(0,0)$, the function is continuous for essentially the same reasons of point 1). Since
	>		$$\left|\frac{xy}{\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}} \right|\leq \frac{x^{2} + y^{2}}{\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}}=\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}},$$
	>		it follows that $f$ is continuous also at $(0,0)$. 
	>4) Following the steps of point 3), we can prove that $f$ is continuous everywhere.
	>5) Outside the diagonal, the function is continuous for essentially the same reason of point 1). To investigate what happens on the diagonal, it is best to write
	>		$$\frac{\sin(x-y)}{\mathrm{e}^{x}-\mathrm{e}^{y}}=\mathrm{e}^{-y}\,\frac{\sin(x-y)}{\mathrm{e}^{x-y}-1}.$$
	>		Then, $f(x,y)$ can be written as the product $g(x,y)\,h(x,y)$, with $g(x,y)=y$ a continuous function, and $h(x,y)=K\circ F(x,y)$ with $F(x,y)=x-y$ a continuous function, and $K(t)=\frac{\sin(t)}{\mathrm{e}^{t}-1}$ a function such that
	>		$$\lim_{t\rightarrow 0}K(t)=\lim_{t\rightarrow 0} \frac{\sin(t)}{\mathrm{e}^{t}-1}=1,$$
	>		where we have used de L'Hôpital rule to compute the limit. Therefore, we can apply the properties of limit to conclude that
	>		$$\lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow(c,c)}g(x,y)h(x,y)=\lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow(c,c)}g(x,y)\left(K\circ F(x,y)\right)= \mathrm{e}^{-c}\lim_{t\rightarrow 0}K(t)=\mathrm{e}^{-c},$$
	>		so that, on the diagonal, $f$ is continuous only at $(0,0)$.

# Derivatives and second order Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions


1) Compute the matrix of partial derivatives of the following functions
	$$ \begin{split} 1) &\qquad f\colon\mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow\mathbb{R},\qquad f(x,y)=x\mathrm{e}^{x^{2} - y^{2}} \\ & \\ 2) & \qquad f\colon\mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow\mathbb{R},\qquad f(x,y)=\left\{\begin{matrix} \frac{xy}{\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}}} & (x,y)\neq (0,0) \\ 0 & (x,y)=(0,0) \end{matrix}\right.\\ & \\ 3) & \qquad f\colon\mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow\mathbb{R},\qquad f(x,y)=\left\{\begin{matrix} \frac{x^{2}y}{x^{4}+y^{2} } & (x,y)\neq (0,0) \\ 0 & (x,y)=(0,0) \end{matrix}\right.\\ & \\ 4) &\qquad f\colon\mathbb{R}^{3}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}^{3},\qquad f(x,y,z)=\left(\begin{matrix}3x +5y \\ 2y + 6z^{2} \\x^{3} - y^{5} +z^{7}   \end{matrix}\right)\\ & \\ 5) &\qquad f\colon\mathbb{R}^{3}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}^{3},\qquad f(x,y,z)=\left(\begin{matrix}\ln(x^{2}+y^{2}+1 ) \\ 2y\,\cos(z^{2}x) \\ \arctan\left(x^{4} +y^{4} + \sqrt{z^{2} +1}\right)   \end{matrix}\right)\\ & \\ \end{split} $$
	>[!note]- Solution
	>1) Amounts to (tedious) routine computations. 
	>2) Outside (0,0), we take partial derivative as in the one-dimensional case. In $(0,0)$, we need to apply [[2.3 Derivatives and Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions#^c8b7dc|the definition]] of partial derivative as a limit. Since the numerator is $xy$, both partial derivatives are $0$.
	>3) Outside (0,0), we take partial derivative as in the one-dimensional case. In $(0,0)$, we need to apply [[2.3 Derivatives and Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions#^c8b7dc|the definition]] of partial derivative as a limit. Since the numerator is $x^{2}y$, both partial derivatives are $0$.
	>4) Amounts to (tedious) routine computations. 
	>5) Amounts to (tedious) routine computations. 

2) Compute the partial derivatives and study the differentiability of $(\mathbb{R}^{2},\mathbb{R}^{2},f,\mathbb{R})$ when
	$$ \begin{split} 1)\quad  & f(x,y) = \left\{\begin{matrix}\frac{x^{2}y^{2}}{x^{4}+y^{4}} & (x,y)\neq(0,0) \\ 0 & (x,y)=(0,0)\end{matrix}\right.  \\ & \\ 2)\quad & f(x,y)  = \left\{\begin{matrix}\frac{x^{2}y^{4}}{x^{2} + y^{2}} & (x,y)\neq(0,0) \\ 0 & (x,y)=(0,0) .\end{matrix}\right. \\ & \\ 3) \quad & f(x,y)= \left\{\begin{matrix}\frac{x^{2}+y}{\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}} & (x,y)\neq(0,0) \\ 0 & (x,y)=(0,0) .\end{matrix}\right. \\ & \\ 4) \quad & f(x,y)= \left\{\begin{matrix}\frac{2xy}{x^{2} + y^{2}} & (x,y)\neq(0,0) \\ 0 & (x,y)=(0,0) .\end{matrix}\right.  \end{split}$$
	>[!note]- Solution
	>1) Outside $(0,0)$, the function is differentiable because it is the quotient of differentiable functions whose denominator never vanishes. At $(0,0)$, using [[2.3 Derivatives and Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions#^c8b7dc|the definition]] of partial derivative as a limit, we obtain that both partial derivatives are $0$. Consequently, the differentiability of $f$ at $(0,0)$ [[2.3 Derivatives and Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions#^801be3|depends on the validity]] of the following limit
	>		$$\lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow(0,0)}\frac{x^{2}y^{2}}{\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}}(x^{4}+y^{4})}=0.$$
	>		However, instead of evaluating the previous limit, we may check what happens when we reach $(0,0)$ along the $x$ axis or along the parabola $y=x^{2}$ to check that $f$ is not continuous at $(0,0)$. Consequently, $f$  can not be differentiable at the origin.
	>2) Outside $(0,0)$, the function is differentiable for the same reason as in point 1). At $(0,0)$, both partial derivatives vanish when computed using the definition through limits. Recaling that $x^{2}\leq x^{2} + y^{2}$, that $y^{2}\leq x^{2}+y^{2}$, and that $y^{4}=y^{2}y^{2}$, we obtain
	>		$$\frac{x^{2}y^{4}}{x^{2} + y^{2}}\leq (x^{2} + y^{2})^{3},$$
	>		which means that $f$ is differentiable at $(0,0)$.
	>3) Outside $(0,0)$, the function is differentiable for the same reason as in point 1). At $(0,0)$, using the definition of partial derivative as a limit, we conclude that the partial derivative along $x$ is $1$, but the partial derivative along $y$ does not exist:
	>		$$\begin{split} \frac{\partial f}{\partial x}(0,0)&:=\lim_{h\rightarrow 0}\frac{h^{2}}{|h|}=1 \\ \frac{\partial f}{\partial y}(0,0)&:=\lim_{h\rightarrow 0}\frac{h}{|h|}=\nexists .\end{split}$$
	>		Since one of the partial derivatives does not exist at $(0,0)$, the function can not be differentiable at $(0,0)$. An alternative proof of the non-differentiability of $f$ at $(0,0)$ can be obtained evaluating what happens when we reach $(0,0)$ along $y=\lambda x$.
	>4) Outside $(0,0)$, the function is differentiable for the same reason as in point 1). At $(0,0)$, using the definition of partial derivative as a limit, we obtain that both vanish. However, evaluating what happens when we reach $(0,0)$ along $y=\lambda x$, we conclude that $f$ is not continuous at $(0,0)$, and thus it is not differentiable there.


3) Verify the validity of the chain rule for $f\circ g$ in the following cases
	$$ \begin{split} 1) &\qquad f(x,y)=xy, \quad g(t)=(\mathrm{e}^{t},\cos(t))\\ &  \\ 2) &\qquad f(x,y)=(x^{2} + y^{2})\ln\left(\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}\right), \quad g(t)=(\mathrm{e}^{t},\mathrm{e}^{-t}) \\ & \\ 3) &\qquad f(u,v)=(\tan(u-1) - \mathrm{e}^{v}, u^{2} - v^{2}),\quad g(x,y)=(\mathrm{e}^{x-y},x-y),\quad(x,y)=(1,1) \\ & \\ 4) &\qquad f(u, v, w) = (\mathrm{e}^{u-w}, \cos(v + u) + \sin(u + v + w)),\quad g(x, y) = (\mathrm{e}^{x} , \cos( y -x), \mathrm{e}^{-y} ),  \quad (x,y)=(0, 0). \end{split} $$
	>[!note]- Solution
	>For all points of the exercise, either we perform all the derivatives directly, or we notice that the functions involved satisfy [[2.3 Derivatives and Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions#^9ceaa7|the assumptions of the chain rule theorem]], so that the chain rule must hold.

4) Let $f\colon\mathbb{R}^{3}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ be differentiable. Use the chain rule to obtain the partial derivatives in spherical and cylindrical coordinates. **Hint**: remember that a change of coordinates is associated with a function $\psi$ so that the function in the new coordinates system is $f\circ\psi$.
	>[!note]- Solution
	>TBA

5) Consider the function $f\colon\mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$ given by
	$$ f(x,y)=\left\{\begin{matrix} \frac{xy^{2}}{x^{2} + y^{2}} & (x,y)\neq(0,0) \\ & \\ 0 & (x,y)=(0,0).\end{matrix}\right. $$
	Compute the partial derivatives at $(0,0)$. Then, consider the function $g\colon\mathbb{R}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}^{2}$ given by $g(t)=(at,bt)$ with $a,b\in\mathbb{R}$ and compute the derivative of $f\circ g$ at $t=0$ both directly and using the chain rule. What can we conclude? 
	>[!note]- Solution
	>Outside $(0,0)$, the partial derivatives can be computed following the rules of the one-dimensional case. In $(0,0)$, we need to apply [[2.3 Derivatives and Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions#^c8b7dc|the definition]] of partial derivatives as limits. Since the numerator is $x^{2}y$, both partial derivatives are $0$.
	>The derivative of $f\circ g(t)$ is easily computed to be $\frac{ab^{2}}{a^{2}+b^{2}}$ at all $t\in\mathbb{R}$. However, the gradient vector (matrix of partial derivatives) of $f$ at (0,0)  is $(0,0)$, so that a direct application of the formula [[2.3 Derivatives and Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions#^9ceaa7|on the left-hand-side of the chain rule]] gives $Df(g(0))g'(0)=0$. We thus conclude that the hypothesis of the chain rule theorem are not met. In particular, $f$ is not differentiable at $(0,0)$. Indeed, the limit
	>$$\lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow (0,0)} \left| \frac{f(x,y)-f(0,0) - f_{x}(0)\,x -f_{y}(0)\,y}{\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}}\right| =\lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow (0,0)} \left| \frac{xy^{2}}{(x^{2} + y^{2})^{\frac{3}{2}}}\right|, $$
	> [[2.3 Derivatives and Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions#^801be3|that must be]] $0$ to ensure differentiability, does not exist because, evaluating what happens when $y=mx$ and $x\rightarrow 0$, we obtain an answer that depends on $m$.

^fbb3a9

6) Show that the function $(\mathbb{R}^{2},\mathbb{R}^{2},f,\mathbb{R})$ given by
	$$ f(x,y)= \left\{\begin{matrix}(x^{2}+y^{2})\,\sin\left(\frac{1}{x^{2}+y^{2}}\right) & (x,y)\neq(0,0) \\ 0 & (x,y)=(0,0) \\ \end{matrix}\right.$$
	has partial derivatives that are continuous everywhere except $(0,0)$. Nonetheless, show that it is differentiable at $(0,0)$.
	>[!note]- Solution
	>This is exercise is essentially [[2.3 Derivatives and Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions#^bed62d|this one]] in disguise.
	

7) Compute the second order Taylor's expansion for
	$$ \begin{split} 1) \quad f(x,y) & =\frac{1}{x^{2}+y^{2}+1}, & \qquad (x_{0},y_{0})&=(0,0) \\ 2) \quad f(x,y) & =\cos(x)\sin(y), & \qquad (x_{0},y_{0})&=(\pi,\frac{\pi}{2}) \\ 3) \quad f(x,y) & =\mathrm{e}^{-x^{2}-y^{2}}\cos(xy),& \qquad (x_{0},y_{0})&=(0,0) \\ 4) \quad f(x,y) & = \mathrm{e}^{(x-1)^{2}} \cos(y),& \qquad (x_{0},y_{0})&=(1,0) \\ 5) \quad f(x,y) & = \sin(xy)-3x^{2}\ln(y) + 1, & \qquad (x_{0},y_{0})&=(\pi/2,1) . \end{split}$$
	>[!note]- Solution
	>All the exercises amount to routine computations.

# Extrema of multivariable functions

 1) Find the global extrema of the function $f\colon \mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ given by
	 $$	 f(x,y)=\frac{x^{2} + y^{2}}{2}	 $$
	 on the closed triangle with vertex in $(0,0)$, $(1,1)$, and $(0,2)$.
	 >[!note]- Solution
	 >The function is continuous (smooth) because it is a polynomial, and the triangle is a closed and bounded domain in $\mathbb{R}^{2}$. Therefore, the [[2.4 Extrema of multivariable functions#^d586b6|extreme value theorem]] implies there will be global extrema. TBA


2) Find the global extrema of the function $f\colon \mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ given by
	$$f(x, y) = x^2 + y^2 + x^2 y + 4$$
	on $D = \{(x, y) \;\colon\;|x| \leq 1,\;|y|\leq 1\}$.

3) Find the global extrema of the function $f\colon \mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ given by
	$$f (x, y) = 4x + 6y − x^2 − y^2 $$
	on $D = \{(x, y) \;\colon\;\;0 \leq x \leq 4, 0 \leq y \leq 5\}$.

4) Find the global extrema of the function $f\colon \mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ given by
	$$f (x, y) = x^3 −3x−y^3 +12y$$
	on $D$ which is the quadrilateral whose vertices are $(−2, 3)$, $(2, 3)$, $(2, 2)$, and $(−2, −2)$.

5) Use the procedure based on Lagrange multipliers to find the global extrema of the function $f\colon \mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ given by
	$$f(x,y)=xy$$
	on the closed unit disk $\overline{D}=\left\{(x,y)\in\mathbb{R}^{2}\,|\quad x^{2} + y^{2}\leq 1\right\}$.

6) Use the procedure based on Lagrange multipliers to find the global extrema of the function $f\colon \mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ given by
	$$f(x,y)=\frac{x^{2} + y^{2}}{2}$$
	on the closed ellipsoid $D=\left\{(x,y)\in\mathbb{R}^{2}\,|\quad \frac{x^{2}}{2} + y^{2}\leq 1\right\}$.

7) Use the procedure based on Lagrange multipliers to find the global extrema of the function $f\colon \mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ given by
	$$ f(x,y)= y\, \mathrm{e}^{x}$$
	on the closed disk $\overline{D}=\left\{(x,y)\in\mathbb{R}^{2}\,|\quad x^{2} + y^{2}\leq 2\right\}$.

8) Use the procedure based on Lagrange multipliers to find the global extrema of the function $f\colon \mathbb{R}^{3}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ given by
	$$ f(x,y,z)= x - y +z $$
	on the unit sphere $D=\left\{(x,y,z)\in\mathbb{R}^{3}\,|\quad x^{2} + y^{2} + z^{2}\leq 1\right\}$.

9) Use the procedure based on Lagrange multipliers to find the global extrema of the function $f\colon \mathbb{R}^{3}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ given by
	$$ f(x,y,z)= x^{2} + y^{2} + z^{2} - x + y  $$
	on the unit sphere $D=\left\{(x,y,z)\in\mathbb{R}^{3}\,|\quad x^{2} + y^{2} + z^{2}\leq 1\right\}$. 

10)  Use the procedure based on Lagrange multipliers to find three numbers whose product is 27 and whose sum is minimal, and three numbers whose sum is 27 and whose product is maximal.

11) A rectangular box with no top is to have a surface area of $16\,m^{2}$. Use the procedure based on Lagrange multipliers to find the dimensions that maximize its volume.

12) Use the procedure based on Lagrange multipliers to design a cylindrical can (with a lid) to contain 1 liter (= 1000 cm3) of water, using the minimum amount of metal.
